Rework the datasource documentation (#7785)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/datasource.adoc

----

=== Reactive datasource

Add either the `reactive-pg-client` or the `reactive-mysql-client` extension.

Then configure your reactive datasource:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=postgresql
quarkus.datasource.username=<your username>
quarkus.datasource.password=<your password>

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
quarkus.datasource.reactive.max-size=20
----

== Default datasource

A datasource can be either a JDBC datasource, a reactive one or both.
It all depends on how you configure it and which extensions you added to your project.

To define a datasource, start with the following:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=h2
----

The database kind defines which type of database you will connect to.

We currently include these built-in database kinds:

* Derby: `derby`
* H2: `h2`
* MariaDB: `mariadb`
* Microsoft SQL Server: `mssql`
* MySQL: `mysql`
* PostgreSQL: `postgresql`, `pgsql` or `pg`

Note that these database kinds only facilitate things.
For instance, when we have a JDBC driver extension for a given kind,
we resolve the JDBC driver to use automatically so you don't need to configure it yourself.

> If you want to use a database kind outside of this list, just use `other` or whatever name you prefer.

Reviewer: It would be nice to add a `[source, properties]` for this case. For example, how do I connect to a DB2 DB?

Author: It's explained a bit later how you can define a specific driver.

I think it's clear enough. We can see if people complain.

Note that I don't want that to be too prominent as things won't work in native.

Reviewer: Right, Explaining that a different JDBC driver from the list is possible but won't work in native is one of the things it would be nice to have in this document

Author: Well, feel free to contribute once this PR is in. I personally have a ton of other more pressing things to do today.

Reviewer: Sure, do you mind if I push a commit adding this to your PR or should I do this in a separate PR?

Author: Better do it in a separate PR after this one is in. I really want that one in merged ASAP.

|`mariadb`
|`org.mariadb.jdbc.Driver`
|`org.mariadb.jdbc.MySQLDataSource`

|`mssql`
|`com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver`
|`com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerXADataSource`

|`mysql`
|`com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver`
|`com.mysql.cj.jdbc.MysqlXADataSource`

|`postgresql`
|`org.postgresql.Driver`
|`org.postgresql.xa.PGXADataSource`
|===

[TIP]
====
As previously stated, most of the time, this automatic resolution will suit you and
you won't need to configure the driver.
====

Note that you can still define a specific driver if you need to (for instance for using the OpenTracing driver)
or if you want to use a database for which we don't have a built-in JDBC driver extension.

Defining a specific JDBC driver is as simple as:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.driver=io.opentracing.contrib.jdbc.TracingDriver
----

==== More configuration

You can configure a lot more things, for instance the size of the connection pool.

Please refer to the <<jdbc-configuration,JDBC configuration reference>> for all the details about the JDBC configuration knobs.

==== Consuming the datasource

If you are using Hibernate ORM, the datasource will be consumed automatically.

> If you want control over the datasource, Quarkus uses CDI so you can inject the datasource in any managed bean:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If for whatever reason, access to the datasource is needed in code, it can be obtained as any other bean in the following manner:
```

[source,java]
----
@Inject
AgroalDataSource defaultDataSource;
----

In the above example, the type is `AgroalDataSource` which is a subtype of `javax.sql.DataSource`.
Because of this, you can also use `javax.sql.DataSource` as the injected type.

=== Reactive datasource

If you prefer using a reactive datasource, Quarkus offers MySQL/MariaDB and PostgreSQL reactive clients.

==== Install the Maven dependencies

> Depending on if you wish to use MySQL/MariaDB or PostgreSQL, you need to add either the `quarkus-reactive-pg-client`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on whether wish to use MySQL/MariaDB or PostgreSQL, you need to add either the `quarkus-reactive-pg-client`
```

Reviewer 3: @geoand should it be `Depending on whether you wish ..` ?

Reviewer 2: Yup, updated.

Don't be surprised when you see my suggestions miss words. That happens to me very often...

or the `quarkus-reactive-mysql-client` extension.

The installed extension must be consistent with the `quarkus.datasource.db-kind` you define in your datasource configuration.

==== Configure the JDBC datasource

Once the driver is there, you just need to configure the connection URL.

Optionally, but highly recommended, you should define a proper size for your connection pool.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
quarkus.datasource.reactive.max-size=20
----

=== Both

By default, if you include both a JDBC extension (+ Agroal) and a reactive datasource extension handling the given database kind,
both will be created.

If you want to disable the JDBC datasource explicitly, use:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.jdbc=false
----

If you want to disable the reactive datasource explicitly, use:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.reactive=false
----

[TIP]
====

> Most of the time, you won't have to do that as you will have either a JDBC driver or a reactive datasource extension and not both.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the time, the configuration above won't be necessary as either a JDBC driver or a reactive datasource extension will be present and not both.
```

====

== Multiple Datasources

=== Configuring Multiple Datasources

For now, multiple datasources are only supported for JDBC and the Agroal extension.
So it is not currently possible to create multiple reactive datasources.

[NOTE]
====

> At the moment, Hibernate ORM supports only one persistence unit which uses the default datasource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, Hibernate ORM supports only one persistence unit which uses the default datasource.
```
